.\" Copyright 2024 Peter Tribble
.TH "STARTXEPHYR" "1" "March 10, 2025" "Tribblix"
.SH NAME
startxephyr - convenient management of Xephyr sessions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fBstartxephyr\fR [-help] [-size t|s|m|l|xl] [-session name | -query host]
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.BR startxephyr
utility simplifies launching a local virtual X server,
.BR Xephyr (1),
and controlling the session run in the virtual X session.
It uses the same mechanism and files as
.BR setxsession (1)
to manage the applications run inside the new X session, but does not
run \fBsetxsession\fR explicitly.
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB-help\fR
.ad
.RS 15n
Shows the usage message, and a list of available session names.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB-session\fR \fIname\fR
.ad
.RS 15n
Specifies that VNC will be launched with the given session \fIname\fR,
as defined by the
.BR setxsession (1)
utility.
Use of this option will not set the default X session to the given
name.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB-size\fR \fIt\fR|\fIs\fR|\fIm\fR|\fIl\fR|\fIxl\fR
.ad
.RS 15n
Sets the size of the Xephyr display to be tiny, small, medium, large, or
extra large.
.RE

.sp
.ne 2
.na
\fB-q|-query\fR \fIhost\fR
.ad
.RS 15n
Rather than launching a session itself, queries a remote
.BR xdm (8)
server using XDMCP.
.RE

.SH NOTES
Unlike
.BR startvnc (1),
which launches a persistent session that you can disconnect from and
reconnect to, \fBstartxephyr\fR has no persistence - as soon as the
application is closed the session and all applications running inside
it will terminate.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR setxsession (1),
.BR startvnc (1),
.BR Xephyr (1),
.BR xdm (8)
